>> Kyle Simpson: And the way to address it
that they invented back then, it has been
this time on an approach ever since,
is an optimization called tail calls.
To understand what a tale call is and
how until call works we need to understand
when we make this recursive call here, the
call on line four, we need to understand
why the stack frame that is currently
executing needs to be cupped.
What is it about that stack frame
that still needs to be cupped around?
And in particular the reason why
that stack frame needs to be cupped
is because we are doing
that first addition,
the addition of the return result,
after the function completes.
So it's essentially that
part of the program
that's requiring our current
stack frame to be around.
But if there was no more work to do,
if we literally just said return count
vowels, and there was nothing before or
after that, it just called
the function and it was done.
Then we could think at least in theory
that it seems like the current stack frame
isn't needed anymore.
We've done all of our work in
our current stack frame and
we're gonna dispatch to
another function call.
And so why don't we just maybe throw
away the current stack frame or
just reuse the existing stack frame for
the next function call, you follow me?
That's the idea here, behind tail calls.
If a function call happens in a position
which is referred to as a tail call,
meaning it's at the tail
of the execution logic,
it's at the very end of
that function's logic.
Then we don't need the existing
stack frame anymore and
we can essentially dispatch to another
function call and not take up any extra
net memory, which means that function
A can call B, can call C, can call D.
If all of those calls
happen in a tail position,
then we've only ever needed one stack
frame in memory, at any given time.
We don't have this run away of
O of N memory usage where every
function call has taken up
a new section of memory.
And it's an implementation detail,
whether we create a new one and
throw the old one away,
or whether we reuse.
It's different under different situations,
but the general idea is at any given time,
you should basically only
need one stack frame.
That only holds for function calls
that have happened in a tail position.
Now, this is an optimization in
the bigger sense of optimization.
It's not actually a performance
optimization, it's not actually faster.
In some cases, it might actually be
slower to do what we're talking about.
So when people say optimization,
they usually jump to thinking,
well this is a performance,
it's gonna go faster.
It's not necessarily gonna go faster,
and in some particular cases,
might actually go slower.
But it's an optimization
in the bigger sense,
because we're optimizing memory usage.
We're saying, let's not have
runaway memory usage unnecessarily.
Let's not keep all those stack
frames that aren't needed anyway.
Let's run in essentially
fixed memory space,
0 of 1 memory usage instead of 0 of n,
okay.
And it's important to understand that
tail calls are an additional feature
that the system, your language, your
compiler, your runtime, has to support.
You don't get it for free.
So you would wonder then,
well, what about JavaScript?
Does JavaScript have this?
And for literally decades
people have been calling for
JavaScript to have this tail call support,
this memory optimization so
that recursion doesn't need to throw this
error that says range error out of memory.
And by the way, a little side
note on the range error issue,
that range error
Stack Overflow exceeded or
whatever that error is there not
because you ran out of memory.
A lot of people think
that's what's happening.
It's not an out of memory error.
If you've ever had an out of
memory condition in a web app,
I guarantee you that what you saw was,
at a minimum, the browser crashed.
And if it wasn't the browser that crashed,
the whole device crashed.
Anybody ever have your mobile phone
just like shut itself off and restart?
How's that even possible to just
be clicking around on Facebook and
all of a sudden my phone restarts itself?
Congratulations, that was
an out of memory error.
Almost certainly, that's what happens when
the system completely runs out of memory.
It just throws its hands in the air and
says start over, right?
Just restart the device,
cuz I am completely out of memory.
And JavaScript knows that that's a really
terrible idea to allow JavaScript programs
to run the device out of memory.
Because it's a very clear sort of
denial of service attack vector for
somebody to run some infinite loop on
a page and kill people's devices, okay?
So because we know that's a terrible idea,
JavaScript,
essentially from the beginning,
has had a check in place that has said,
let's not run so far that we are going to
definitely eventually run out of memory.
And that heuristic that decision metric
for how does it know if it's going to run
out of memory is more complex
than you might have expected.
It used to be really, really simple.
So this is actually true, back in IE6,
there was a fixed limit for
the number of function calls that could
happen and that limit would in succession.
This doesn't mean total functions
ever executed, it means in a chain or
one it's called the other.
The total stack depth was limited to 13.
I don't have any idea where they
came up with that number but
if you ever had a situation where
you call to that 14th call and
a chain of function calls,
you would get the range error in IE6.
Somehow, someway, they thought 13, maybe
they had a heuristic that said nobody ever
goes over 13 and if they do, it's
almost always recursive, I don't know.
But, anyway, it was limited to 13,
which is ridiculous, right?
That's ridiculously low because that's
probably less than 100 K of memory,
way probably less than 100 k of memory.
So how many function
calls should it allow?
This is a weird prediction because
it's essentially the engine
needing to say this looks like you're
probably gonna run them out of memory.
You can't actually know if
the recursion is just about to finish.
There's no way for
the system to predict that.
So it's gotta run
basically a heuristic and
say, I think this looks like
you're running a lot of memory and
you're probably gonna run the system out
of memory so I'm just going to stop you.
That's the heuristic, and
it's more complex than you might realize.
Luckily, today, in modern browsers,
it is much more sophisticated,
the way they decide this stuff.
I don't know exactly how they work.
I don't know if it's monitoring
the amount of available RAM at any given
point or something.
But in my general testing,
I've seen somewhere
around 20,000 in the VA JavaScript
engine on my Chrome instance.
I don't know if it's different for
VAD on different devices or whatever.
But I've basically been able to get up to
about 20,000 stacked up before I generally
see that Ranger, sometimes 21,000
it's somewhere in that range.
So your mileage literally may vary there,
you may have different
results when you run it.
But it's pretty easy to set up a test,
just write a recursive function
that it just prints out an eye and
then increments and see how many
I's print out, that sort of thing.
So the good news is that actually well
on the topic of writing yourself a test,
just putting in a try catch so
that you can see how how big I was
whenever the exception was strong.
But anyway the point is there
is some sort of limit and
it's going to be different based upon
the environment that you are running in.
Based upon the device, based upon
the browser all of those things,
those are not things that
you can predict or control.
So that is what ups this ante for
saying we need to have JavaScript
support in this idea of telcalls.
And it has never done that, it has never
gone to that level, and one of the reasons
historically for not having that is
because the idea of requiring tail
calls was almost antithetical to the way
the JavaScript specification was written.
I don't really mean antithetical, but
the specification is really deliberately
designed to be as agnostic about
implementation details as possible.
It says, this is the final outcome that
should happen, and it does specify
algorithms for how you should, you know,
go about accomplishing things.
But if the end goal of any operation is
preserved, the JavaScript engines, and
there are many, There are fewer and fewer
each day, but there are many out there.
The JavaScript engines are allowed to
decide, we're gonna cut this corner and
have this effect.
As long as we're spec compliant We have
a lot of leeway to do different sorts of
optimizations, to address things.
So the shocker a JavaScript engine for
Microsoft back when they were running that
did things dramatically differently for
the Windows operating system than say
the chrome V8 was was doing on
the Mako OS architecture, right?
They're dramatically different ways of
approaching those fine level memory
optimizations and things.